Inverse Kinematics with Python (#358)
solita/solita.github.com: _posts/2020-07-31-inverse-kinematics-with-python.md

---
layout: post
title: Inverse Kinematics with Python
author: jgke
excerpt: >
  Inverse kinematics is a method for calculating how a limb
  should be positioned in order to touch some point. It's
  surprisingly simple!
tags:
 - Python
 - Game development
 - Robotics
---

<img src="/img/inverse-kinematics-with-python/final_product.gif"
alt="Animated 2D line with four joints, continuously pointing towards a moving ball">

Traditionally video games have handled animations by first drawing animations
frame by frame, starting from old games with two or three frames for moving and

> gradually increasing the amount of frames in order to make the animations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gradually increasing the number of frames in order to make the animations
```

Could also split the first sentence, it's pretty long now.

> smoother. Eventually with customers looking for increased realism, eventually

Reviewer: Could find another phrasing to avoid double "eventually".

> companies started looking for creating animations procedurally rather than

Reviewer: ```suggestion
companies started creating animations procedurally rather than
```

Could also replace "companies" with "game developers"?

using a pre-drawn set of animations. This enabled creating features like
ragdolls, which have since then become a staple in 3D games. Further
development into procedural animation has enabled making even more immersive
games, with characters placing their hands onto nearby walls when walking.

In an unrelated industry, many similar topics have been already been
researched. How a hand should be positioned in order to touch the wall is
solved by the same math as how a robotic arm should be positioned in order to
drive a screw in. This particular area of math is called _inverse kinematics_,

> which asks which angles a set of joints should be set in order for a robotic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which asks which angles a set of joints should be set for a robotic
```

arm to touch the desired point. This blog post implements a simple algorithm
called _Cyclic Coordinate Descent_ (or CCD) which numerically approximates the
joint angles.

Math
----

CCD approximates the correct joint angles by going over every joint starting

> from the "palm" joint, and adjusting the joint angle so the target point is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from the "palm" joint and adjusting the joint angle, so the target point is
```

located within the line going from the angle to the palm. With a few
iterations, the resulting approximation is pretty good.

> We'll be using PyGame for visualizations, which will also take care most of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll be using PyGame for visualizations, which will also take care of most of the
```

actual math. The only thing we have to think about is what vectors to rotate.

<div style="display: flex">
<img src="/img/inverse-kinematics-with-python/math1.png" alt="" />
<img src="/img/inverse-kinematics-with-python/math2.png" alt="" />
</div>
<div style="display: flex">
<img src="/img/inverse-kinematics-with-python/math3.png" alt="" />
<img src="/img/inverse-kinematics-with-python/math4.png" alt="" />
</div>

> A quick primer in vector math: Vectors are in our use case essentially objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A quick primer in vector math: In our use case vectors are essentially objects
```

containing two numbers, x length and y length. Adding two vectors together
results in a third vector with the x and y components added together. Negating
a vector (or multiplying by -1) results in each component being negated.

These can be visualized pretty easily. In the following graph, a, b and c are
vectors while α is the angle between a and b. If you add b and c together, you

> get a. Similarily, if you remove b from a, you get c.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
get a. Similarly, if you remove b from a, you get c.
```

> get a. Similarily, if you remove b from a, you get c.

Reviewer: Could highlight `a`, `b`, `c` and perhaps `x` and `y` as well somehow.

<div style="display: flex; justify-content: center; margin: 15px">
<img src="/img/inverse-kinematics-with-python/vectorprimer.png" alt="" />
</div>

With PyGame, these can be easily computed.

```python
from pygame.math import Vector2

a = Vector2(200, -100)
b = Vector2(200, 100)
c = a - b # or Vector2(0, -200)
alpha = a.angle_to(b)
```

Solving the angles
------------------

<div style="display: flex">
<img src="/img/inverse-kinematics-with-python/math5.png" alt="" />
</div>

In this picture, we need to first rotate a around b, so that the line between a
and b points towards the target. After that, we need to rotate a and b around c, so
that the line between a and c points towards the target.

Let's start off by defining the points and the target. Since we are going to
rotate stuff, let's store the points as relative coordinates and a set of angles.

```python
points = list(map(Vector2, [(100, 100), (200, 100), (300, 100), (400, 100), (500, 100)]))
target = Vector2(450, 300)

rel_points = []
angles = []

for i in range(1, len(points)):
    rel_points.append(points[i] - points[i-1])
    angles.append(0)
```

Let's consider the simple case first. When we are trying to adjust the

> a-b-target angle, we want to rotate a around b. Essentially we want to take

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a-b-target angle, we want to rotate a around b. Essentially, we want to
```

    for point in points:
        pygame.draw.circle(screen, black, (int(point[0]), int(point[1])), 5)
    pygame.draw.circle(screen, black, (int(target[0]), int(target[1])), 10)
    pygame.display.flip()
```

Let's wrap the program in a small loop, where we update the point positions
after solving the appropriate angles:

```python
import sys, pygame
pygame.init()

size = width, height = 640, 480
screen = pygame.display.set_mode(size)

while 1:
    for event in pygame.event.get():
        if event.type == pygame.QUIT: sys.exit()

    solve_ik(0, points[-1], target)

    angle = 0
    for i in range(1, len(points)):
        angle += angles[i-1]
        points[i] = points[i-1] + rel_points[i-1].rotate(angle)

    render()
    pygame.time.wait(int(1000/60))
```

With this code, the angles converge almost instantly to an acceptable range.

<img src="/img/inverse-kinematics-with-python/example1.gif"
alt="Animated 2D line with four joints, almost instantly pointing towards a circle">

Making it better
----------------

Let's do small adjustments to make this look better. Let's make the target move
around so that the angles need to be constantly adjusted, and at the same time

> limit the amount an angle can move per frame, so the movement looks more natural.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
limit the amount a joint can move per frame, so the movement looks more natural.
```

> Moving the ball around is simple, just move it constantly every frame and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moving the ball around is simple, just move with constant speed every frame and
```

reverse the direction if it hits a wall.

```python
target_speed = Vector2(3, 3)
#...
target += target_speed
if target.x <= 0 or target.x >= width:
    target_speed.x = -target_speed.x
if target.y <= 0 or target.y >= height:
    target_speed.y = -target_speed.y
```

Limiting angular momentum is also pretty simple, just determine the rotation
direction and limit it to some constant.

```
angles[i] += min(max(-3, angle), 3)
```

Summary
-------

Inverse kinematics drive calculations like "How can I make this arm touch this

> ball?", while Python and PyGame enable implementing small simulations easily.

Reviewer: The summary section could use a bit more oomph.

---
layout: post
title: Inverse Kinematics with Python
author: jgke
excerpt: >
  Inverse kinematics is a method for calculating how a limb
  should be positioned in order to touch some point. It's
  surprisingly simple!
tags:
 - Python
 - Game development
 - Robotics
---

<img src="/img/inverse-kinematics-with-python/final_product.gif"
alt="Animated 2D line with four joints, continuously pointing towards a moving ball">

Traditionally video games have handled animations by first drawing animations
frame by frame, starting from old games with two or three frames for moving and
gradually increasing the number of frames in order to make the animations
smoother. Eventually with customers looking for increased realism, developers
and artists started creating animations procedurally rather than using a
pre-drawn set of animations. This enabled creating features like ragdolls,
which have since then become a staple in 3D games. Further development into

> procedural animation has enabled making even more immersive games, with
> characters placing their hands onto nearby walls when walking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
procedural animation has enabled making even more immersive games, with
features like characters placing their hands onto nearby walls when walking.
```
